---
layout: post
title: C++ Notes
categories: [code, news]
plugin: intense
hidden: true
---

This page contains notes and misconceptions I've had or heard about
C++. I use it as a reminder for myself, but it may contain things that
may interest you. Don't hesitate to contact me if you think something
is incorrect or missing.

## Technical Rambling

### Boolean integral values

Converting an integer value to a boolean results in *false* if the
value is *zero*, *true* otherwise. Because of this, we tend to think
that a conversion of the boolean *true* to an integer may result in
any non-zero value. However, the standard guarantees that non-zero
value to be *1*:

> [conv.integral]
> If the source type is bool, the value false is converted to zero and
> the value true is converted to one.

Thus, the following is correct:

```c++
bool const this_is_true = true;
int what_is_true = this_is_true;

assert(what_is_true == 1);
```

## Pre-increment operator versus post-increment operator

Here is how are declared the pre-increment and post-increment
operators for a class X:

```c++
struct X
{
	X & operator++();	// prefix ++a
	X operator++(int);	// postfix a++
};
```

The post-increment operator returns the original value of the object
before it was incremented, it has to:

* save the current state of the object,
* increment the object,
* return the previous value.

Thus, the idiomatic implementation of the post-increment operator of X
is:

```c++
X X::operator++(int a)
{
	X previous = *this;

	// increment X by a

	return previous;
}
```

Because of this extra copy, using the pre-increment operator is the
preferred way to increment a type in C++, unless there is a need to
keep the previous value.

### Conditional operator (ternaries)

The following is a valid C++ code:

```c++
int a = 10;
int b = 20;

((condition) ? (a) : (b)) = 42;
```

It is the equivalent of:

```c++
int a = 10;
int b = 20;

if (condition)
{
    a = 42;
}
else
{
    b = 42;
}
```

This is possible since the conditional operator can return lvalues in
C++ (hopefully not in C):

> [expr.cond]
> If the second and third operands are lvalues and have the same type,
> the result is of that type and is an lvalue.

Now, consider the following code that looks slightly different:

```c++
int a = 10;
int b = 20;

(condition) ? (a) : (b) = 42;
```

It happens to do something totally different:

```c++
int a = 10;
int b = 20;

if (condition)
{
    a;
}
else
{
    b = 42;
}
```

That's because of the priority of operators: the ternary operator has
a lower priority that the assignment one.

### Primitive types and initializations

Consider the following code:

```c++
void f()
{
	int a;
	int b = 0;
	int c = int();
	int d();
}
```

Despite the apparences, I found this rather tricky.

- int a;* defines and declares a, but does not initialize it.
  As we are in a function, the variable exists on the stack, it can take any
  random value that sits there.
- *int b = 0;* defines, declares, and initializes b to 0, so far so good.
- *int c = int();* defines, declares and calls the default initializer
  of c, which happens to set it to 0.
- *int d();* is a function declaration, only here to add more confusion.

*int c = int();* is a bit misleading because common sense tells us it
is the same as *int c;* but that is not the case. Here is what the
standard says about it:

> [8.5] Initializers
> 
> An object whose initializer is an empty set of parentheses, i.e., (), shall be default-initialized.

And:

> [8.5] Initializer
> 
> To default-initialize an object of type T means:
> * if T is a non-POD class type (clause 9), the default constructor
>   for T is called (and the initialization is ill-formed if T has no
>   accessible default constructor);
> * if T is an array type, each element is default-initialized;
>   otherwise, the storage for the object is zero-initialized.

This has some implications, for instance when creating a new entry in
a map, the default constructor of the object is called, if your map
contains integers, you can assume they'll be initialized to zero, thus
the following is safe:

```c++
#include <map>
#include <string>

void f()
{
	std::map<std::string, unsigned int> stats;

	++stats["events"];
}
```

### Pointers

#### Function pointers

On most architectures, a function pointer is simply a code pointer, it
holds the address of the first instruction of the function and so, its
size is the same as a classic pointer.

I haven't had the chance to verify this, but on some architectures
they are pointing to descriptors (IA-64 and PPC64), which contain the
address of the function as well as architecture specific data. A call
to a function then reads the descriptor, set some register and
actually call the function.

Though in practice function pointers are pointing to locations in
memory, the C standard doesn't enforce the size of function pointers,
so there's no guarantee that casting a function pointer to a void
pointer is safe. Interestingly, POSIX requires that conversion to be
safe because of *dlsym*'s API:

> Note that conversion from a void * pointer to a function pointer as
> in:
> 
> fptr = (int (*)(int))dlsym(handle, "myfunction");
> 
> is not defined by the ISO C standard. This standard requires this
> conversion to work correctly on conforming implementations.

So in practice, it is fine to cast function pointers to void pointers
on POSIX compliant systems, despite the warning you get from your
compiler.

#### Method pointers

Not yet investigated why, but the following is disturbing:

```c++
#include <iostream>

struct A {};

typedef void	(*fptr)();	// pointer to a function
typedef void	(A::*mptr)();	// pointer to a method of A

int	main()
{
	std::cout << "fptr's size:\t" << sizeof(fptr) << "\n";
	std::cout << "mptr's size:\t" << sizeof(mptr) << "\n";

	return 0;
}
```

Which gives:

```bash
fptr's size:	8
mptr's size:	16
```

### References

#### Initialization of const T &

I find this confusing, references on const objects differ from
references on objects, the following code is valid:

```c++
int const & i = 42;
std::string const & s = "hejsan";
```

That's because the initializer of a reference on a const doesn't need
to be an lvalue. When it's not, a temporary object with the same
lifetime of the reference is created, if needed, implicit conversions
are done. Remove the const and it won't compile.

This can be handy when you have to call functions or methods that
takes references on const objects and you don't want to waste a few
lines defining them:

```c++
void f(std::string const & s, std::string const & d)
{
}

int main()
{
	f("hejsan", "world");

	return 0;
}
```

## Idioms

### Meaningful conditions

Consider the following code:

```c++
if ((event_timestamp + lag) < now_timestamp)
{
	// do something
}
```

It takes some time to guess the purpose of the condition; in the
middle of reviews of larger pieces of code, it is easy to loose track
of what's being done, especially when conditions aren't as trivial as
this one. A way to add some semantic is to use a temporary boolean
describing the intent behind the condition:

```c++
bool const event_is_late = (event_timestamp + lag) < now_timestamp;

if (event_is_late)
{
	// do something
}
```

A more complex example:

```c++
if (event_timestamp != 0 &&
   (((event_timestamp + lag) < now_timestamp) &&
   get_option("store_late_events"))
{
	// do something
}
```

Becomes:

```c++
bool const event_is_late = (event_timestamp + lag) < now_timestamp;
bool const event_is_null = event_timestamp == 0;
bool const store_late_events = get_option("store_late_events");

if (!event_is_null && (event_is_late && store_late_events))
{
	// do something
}
```

### Yoda conditions

Yoda conditions can help to avoid some mistakes when writing condition
involving immutable things, the idea is to reverse the condition so
the immutable is on the left side. For instance the following code
compiles fine, despite containing a possible error:

```c++
int main()
{
	int i = 42;

	if (i = 10)
	{
		// do something
	}

	return 0;
}
```

The intent was to write i == 10, however it does something totally
different: 10 is assigned to i, and because i is different from 0, we
enter the condition. Enters Yoda:

```c++
int main()
{
	int i = 42;

	if (10 = i)
	{
		// do something
	}

	return 0;
}
```

That does not compile because you can't assign a value to 10.

One could argue that Yoda is less useful nowadays because modern
compilers issue warnings about such cases, suggesting to wrap the
assignment with parentheses.

## Tricks

Disclaimer: The cost of software maintenance increases with the square
of the programmer's creativity. (*Robert D. Bliss*).

### Know if a class has a method

```c++
#include <string>
#include <vector>
#include <iostream>

#define DECLARE_CLASS_HAS_METHOD(NAME, METHOD)                          \
    template <typename CLASS>                                           \
    class NAME                                                          \
    {                                                                   \
        typedef char Yes;                                               \
        typedef long No;                                                \
                                                                        \
        template <typename T> static Yes check(typeof(&T::METHOD));     \
        template <typename T> static No check(...);                     \
    public:                                                             \
        enum { Value = (sizeof(check<CLASS>(0)) == sizeof(Yes)) };      \
    }

DECLARE_CLASS_HAS_METHOD(HasLength, length);

using namespace std;

int main()
{
  cout << "string has length() = " << boolalpha << HasLength<string>::Value << endl;
  cout << "vector<int> has length() = " << boolalpha << HasLength<vector<int> >::Value << endl;
  
  return 0;
}
```
